---
published: '2024-09-26T22:00:00.000Z'
canonical_url: https://leadshorizons.com/p/job-trial-period-a-two-way-street
series: Engineering Strategy 101
authors:
  - alvarolorentedev
description: >-
  Discover how job trial periods benefit both employers and employees. Learn to
  maximize this evaluation time for mutual success and informed decision-making.
Tags:
  - productivity
  - technology
  - startup
  - development
cover_image: >-
  https://prod-files-secure.s3.us-west-2.amazonaws.com/df75203e-cd58-41eb-8339-d5bf4288eb0e/630c13dd-5a1f-4664-bb0e-af68a3bc17e3/Designer_%283%29.png?X-Amz-Algorithm=AWS4-HMAC-SHA256&X-Amz-Content-Sha256=UNSIGNED-PAYLOAD&X-Amz-Credential=AKIAT73L2G45FSPPWI6X%2F20241205%2Fus-west-2%2Fs3%2Faws4_request&X-Amz-Date=20241205T120510Z&X-Amz-Expires=3600&X-Amz-Signature=fea7bd789a7dee715bcfeda8b850a9cef0b63faaab330d2a0ad98569e1b0c381&X-Amz-SignedHeaders=host&x-id=GetObject
title: 'Job Trial Period: A Two Way Street For Success'
---

Dear readers, I am back. I apologize for the hiatus, it has been a few “interesting” months in my life that have made me reflect a lot on some topics that before I thought were trivial, and one-sided. I will try to share some thoughts over the next few posts. So let's start with a subject that is really fresh in my mind, as it's what has been affecting me over the last few months.


To the question “During your career, did to pass a Job trial period?” the most common answer will be “Yes”. Traditionally, it is viewed as a tool for employers to evaluate potential hires, nevertheless it's crucial to recognize that these periods serve a dual purpose. They are, in fact, a two-way street that benefits both employers and employees alike.


## What is in for Us?


The trial period is an evaluation period, it can even be seen as an extension of the interview process, as you will never get to know a person you will spend most of your awake workday day with.

With this in mind, the same as in interview, we need to remember is not a one-sided evaluation, Employers should evaluate ROI & employees should evaluate company fitness.


From an **employer's standpoint**, trial periods offer several advantages:

- **Skill Assessment:** Employers can evaluate a candidate's practical skills and how they apply their knowledge in real-world scenarios.
- **Cultural Fit:** It provides an opportunity to assess how well the new hire integrates with the existing team and company culture.
- **Performance Evaluation:** Employers can gauge the employee's productivity, work ethic, and ability to meet deadlines.
- **Risk Mitigation:** If the employee doesn't meet expectations, the company can part ways with minimal legal and financial implications.

Equally important, but often overlooked, is the **employee's perspective** on trial periods:

- **Company Culture Experience:** Employees can immerse themselves in the company culture and determine if it aligns with their values and work style.
- **Job Satisfaction Assessment:** It allows individuals to evaluate if the role meets their expectations and career aspirations.
- **Team Dynamics:** Employees can assess how well they work with their colleagues and immediate supervisors.
- **Work-Life Balance:** The trial period offers insight into the company's approach to work-life balance and flexibility

## Maximizing the Trial Period


To make the most of a job trial period, both parties should approach it with openness and clear communication:

- **Set Clear Expectations:** Employers should outline specific goals and performance metrics for the trial period.
- **Regular Feedback:** Implement a system for frequent, two-way feedback to address concerns and acknowledge progress.
- **Encourage Questions:** Create an environment where the new hire feels comfortable asking questions and seeking clarification.
- **Provide Necessary Resources:** Ensure the employee has all the tools and information needed to perform their job effectively.

To achieve this, we need to use the correct tools for the job


### Onboarding Plan


An effective onboarding plan should contain:

- **Comprehensive introduction:** Include an overview of the company's culture, policies, and procedures.
- **Role-specific training:** Provide training tailored to the new employee's specific job responsibilities.
- **Introduction to team and colleagues:** Facilitate meetings with team members and key personnel.
- **Resource provision:** Ensure the employee has all necessary tools and information to perform their job effectively.
- **Assign a buddy**: pair the employee with a more experienced colleague who can provide informal guidance and support that can help navigate the day-to-day aspects of the job.
- **Assign a mentor**: pair the employee mentor is usually a more senior employee who can provide guidance, share industry insights, and help them grow in their role over a longer period.
- **Regular feedback sessions:** as a manager, schedule frequent check-ins to address concerns and acknowledge progress.

A well-structured onboarding plan helps new employees quickly integrate into their roles and the organization, reducing the learning curve and increasing productivity during the trial period.


### 30-60-90 Plan


A 30-60-90 plan is a strategic framework used for onboarding new employees or setting goals for the first 90 days in a new role. It breaks down objectives and expectations into three distinct periods:

- **30 days:** Focus on learning and understanding the role, company culture, and immediate responsibilities.
- **60 days:** Begin contributing more actively, implementing initial strategies, and identifying areas for improvement.
- **90 days:** Fully integrate into the role, start driving results, and propose long-term strategies or improvements.

This plan helps structure the transition period, ensuring clear expectations and measurable progress for both the employee and the employer during the trial period, with a framework that can help focus the feedback and


## Evaluation of the outcome of a trial period


### Pass


When a trial period results in a successful outcome, it's important to celebrate this achievement. Both the employer and employee should acknowledge the positive experience and use it as a foundation for future growth.


This is an opportunity to set new goals, discuss career development plans, and reinforce the mutual commitment to success. A successful trial period can lead to increased motivation, job satisfaction, and a stronger sense of belonging within the organization.


### No Pass by Employer


If an employer decides not to continue the employment relationship after the trial period, it's crucial to handle the situation professionally and sensitively. 


The employer should provide clear, constructive feedback about why the trial was unsuccessful, focusing on the root cause without personal criticisms. This feedback can be valuable for the employee's future career development. 


Additionally, the employer should ensure all legal and contractual obligations are met, including any notice periods or severance pay if applicable. Treating the departing employee with respect and dignity during this process is not only ethical, but also maintains the company's reputation as a fair employer.


### No Pass by Employee


When an employee decides not to continue after the trial period, it's equally important to handle the situation professionally. 


The employee should provide honest feedback about their experience, highlighting any misalignment or concerns that led to their decision. This feedback can be valuable for the employer to improve their onboarding process or workplace environment. 


The employee should also ensure they fulfill any contractual obligations, such as providing proper notice.


## Conclusion


Job trial periods are an opportunity for both parties to evaluate the potential for a long-term, mutually beneficial relationship. By approaching these periods with transparency, open communication, and a willingness to learn, both employers and employees can make informed decisions about their future together.


This period should not be demonized, even if it ends in a “No Pass”, it should be taken as a good outcome as it's a relationship that would have most probably failed, or would create friction and other risks down the road when legal obligation from both sides are more complex.
If you're the employee, remember this is not a failure. Your worth remains unchanged—it simply wasn't the right fit or timing. If you're the employer, don't be too hard on yourself. Not all relationships work out. The best approach is to move forward and end things on the best terms possible.

