---
published: '2024-03-28T03:00:00.000Z'
canonical_url: https://leadshorizons.com/p/product-teams
series: Engineering Strategy 101
authors:
  - alvarolorentedev
description: >-
  Dive into the transformative world of product teams and vertical slicing in
  our latest Engineering Strategy 101 series. Gain insights on building
  cross-functional teams, fostering innovation, and aligning with customer
  values for more efficient and agile product development. Unlock the blueprint
  to revolutionize your software development approach and drive success. 
Tags:
  - business
  - technology
  - tech
  - productivity
cover_image: >-
  https://prod-files-secure.s3.us-west-2.amazonaws.com/df75203e-cd58-41eb-8339-d5bf4288eb0e/ebdbc2c6-cb58-4098-9bab-9c1273367c1d/bearly-generated-image-8A4EE7.png?X-Amz-Algorithm=AWS4-HMAC-SHA256&X-Amz-Content-Sha256=UNSIGNED-PAYLOAD&X-Amz-Credential=ASIAZI2LB4666NQ7HL4E%2F20250731%2Fus-west-2%2Fs3%2Faws4_request&X-Amz-Date=20250731T105714Z&X-Amz-Expires=3600&X-Amz-Security-Token=IQoJb3JpZ2luX2VjEKf%2F%2F%2F%2F%2F%2F%2F%2F%2F%2FwEaCXVzLXdlc3QtMiJHMEUCID2XKpkmUKfGgWWagcTb%2BSKOySx0IobPosOc5CtmsS8aAiEA3xEREImfccbu1R2sgppWTxLraN4xpXLQvJ9l2IVHm6QqiAQI0P%2F%2F%2F%2F%2F%2F%2F%2F%2F%2FARAAGgw2Mzc0MjMxODM4MDUiDPq%2BmCRrv0Oycvb1UCrcA1R2b7aznSDmF0zmTwzKlCrkPqMfl94kBZ3yCfSmU%2FXLQ4xy6TBCSZdYEFVgz%2B9VDJA3EHxavtIye741yF%2BSQ%2BTaL17aK5OqgyjALD6dzgpeeu9aOVkiqDrvl%2B2gb83WI95OBtttRPQJBRqMAtoVKcsAssKWFRJ%2Bjcf7uofdKOxGBSX7xobyOR3M6IyadHLTiplynPFVmNi5%2FjeJda0vyEBV%2F1ZJTr%2B5D73VtarNe81VIAiQFF%2Fp7r8ajT2iv6TN8x%2F9ftjYvnji4Qm%2BT6rYaaQWDYMOa6H1uG5m7zg09DmSSCMWD1otAb17aUuz6wK%2FW6JaYawtqJNWwb9dAvm%2FeblLbuZuXXEs%2F16CqU7mNvAh0ataaD3soSrbXCKUNiyUXRnl%2FG5W%2F%2FCwz4Dk30%2FzUprpfuRcAcGMkmw6ntUCscG26pJcuAsbQi9B8VT%2FnZ5cwFLKmzLmfpivhkoyTse%2BzO61LWAOTpEo9bql3fnnyIDql%2BYe%2FMH1ljy9KKBEniUqNu95E17eRl8mAGdKv%2F%2FJvhLYrV06467Fld8x6HnbaxyNXzTmfR3TA0zUOOkNpB1tXVXGc%2B%2F35nvnBXxMI%2F8x5%2FmadxR7I1QAtB6FX6ZUHg0AMp6ytU%2Bf6A8zvRV8MMaarMQGOqUBua85ef7BZY%2FuoqXuheDMDnmFvX64NWWuJ9jRkpAh8wgsS9Q%2FleBE7ZkBmw6DxlVDd4uVw2n0TSEdpktsAGz5Xq1aDWTg46kbpiXQ9zqRwTTIElBOIiGGSPENdrP%2B40NTrrRUKzOFe0Yx7sOZxLyUJ3%2Ft4cyk32v0ZE6LfeT25vRvXc8SC8V%2FIYy8v%2FcosgdLSnKzw4FbzS%2BA8p%2FFOBjrzU67oPYa&X-Amz-Signature=19bc6eb6b93932eb2cb8836220196901a90931e959940432d5a2dfa46f68c6ce&X-Amz-SignedHeaders=host&x-amz-checksum-mode=ENABLED&x-id=GetObject
title: 'Product teams: Aligning to Value'
---

When you contemplate the structure and effectiveness of your software departments, the concept of product teams and the strategy of vertical slicing emerge as pivotal part of the journey. 

These methodologies can revolutionize the way products are developed and maintained, directly impacting their success and the adaptiveness of the organization. This post aims to explore the essence of product teams, their significance, and the practical steps to implement vertical slicing within those teams.


## **Understanding Product Teams**


A product team is a cross-functional team that includes all the roles necessary to develop, test, and deliver value to the customer. It's centered around a single user need, this will either mean a single product or a closely related set of products. 


### **Value of Product Teams**

1. **Enhanced Focus and Agility**: Product teams focus on a single product or a set of products, enabling them to rapidly respond to changing customer needs and market conditions. This focus accelerates decision-making processes and product iterations.
2. **Improved Accountability**: With clear ownership, product teams have a better understanding of their objectives, leading to increased accountability and a stronger sense of purpose among team members.
3. **Boosted Innovation**: Cross-functional interaction within the team promotes diverse viewpoints, fostering an environment ripe for innovation and creative problem-solving.
4. **Customer-Centric Development**: Product teams operate with a strong understanding of and alignment with customer needs, ensuring that the products developed truly resonate with and bring value to the end users.
5. **Efficiency**: Such teams minimize the traditional overhead associated with coordination across different departments, leading to more efficient use of time.

### Roles In product teams


Lets delineate the core skills essential to a product team's success and explain the unique value each contributes to the team's objectives:

- Product Manager: acts as the visionary and strategist of the team. They are responsible for identifying customer needs, setting the product vision, and prioritizing the development roadmap. By ensuring that the team understands the 'why' behind their work, product managers play a critical role in aligning product development with market demands and organizational goals.
- Developers: bring the product vision to life through code. They are the architects and builders of the product, responsible for implementing features, fixing bugs, and ensuring the product's technical viability. Their expertise spans across front-end, back-end, and full-stack development, allowing for versatile problem-solving and innovation.
- Designers:  focus on the user interface (UI) and user experience (UX) of the product. They ensure that the product is not only functional but also intuitive, engaging, and accessible to users. By advocating for the end-user's perspective, designers play a key role in making products that are genuinely user-centric.
- Quality Assurance: are the guardians of product quality. They are responsible for identifying and mitigating defects before the product reaches the end-users. Through various testing methodologies, QA engineers ensure the product meets all functional requirements, performance standards, and user expectations.
- Operations Professionals: often including DevOps, focus on the deployment, monitoring, and maintenance of the product in production environments. They ensure that the product's infrastructure is robust, scalable, and secure. By facilitating continuous integration and delivery, they enable the team to release updates quickly and reliably.
- **Business Analyst**: Serves as the bridge between business objectives and technology solutions. They analyze market trends, assess business processes, and gather requirements to guide the team towards solutions that align with strategic goals. Their insights help prioritize features based on business value and customer impact.
- **Data Analyst**: Plays a crucial role in informing decision-making through data. They collect, process, and analyze data related to product performance, customer behavior, and market trends. By turning data into actionable insights, data analysts help the team understand user needs, measure product success, and identify areas for improvement.

Incorporating these roles into a product team ensures a comprehensive approach to product development, where strategic vision, technical execution, user experience, quality assurance, operational stability, business alignment, and data-driven decision-making converge to create products that truly meet customer needs and drive business value.


These roles not always need to be different people, nevertheless they are skill that team members need to have or nurture. We could talk here about the T-shapped engineering concept but i am sure you can find deeper knowledge in  newsletter and other resources I have published on the past.  


## **Understanding Vertical Slicing**


Vertical slicing refers to the process of breaking down functionalities and features into smaller, manageable pieces that can be developed, tested, and deployed independently. This method contrasts with the traditional horizontal slicing, where projects are divided among different departments or layers (e.g., backend, frontend, database). Implementing vertical slicing necessitates a cultural shift and strategic planning:

1. **Redefine Team Composition**: Transition from discipline-centric teams (e.g., a backend development team) to cross-functional teams that include members capable of handling all aspects of feature development, from UI design to database management.
2. **Adopt Customer-Centric Approaches**: Align team objectives and features development with customer journeys and value delivery. Each slice should represent a step towards solving a customer problem or fulfilling a need.
3. **Foster a Collaborative Mindset**: Encourage open communication and collaboration within and among product teams. This can be facilitated by regular stand-ups, shared goals, and common platforms for project management and documentation.
4. **Leverage Agile and DevOps Practices**: Implement agile methodologies and DevOps practices to support the rapid development, testing, and deployment of vertical slices. Continuous integration and continuous deployment (CI/CD) pipelines are essential for automating these processes.
5. **Train and Mentor**: Equip your teams with the necessary skills and knowledge to function effectively in this new environment. This might involve cross-training to ensure that team members can handle multiple aspects of development and operations or specific training in agile methodologies.
6. **Measure and Adapt**: Establish metrics to measure the effectiveness of product teams and the impact of vertical slicing on product development. Use these insights to continuously improve processes and adapt strategies as needed.

## Slicing your organization into product teams


Most companies will not be organized in this ways so its important to understand how to get there if its our objective. Initiating the transition towards product teams and vertical slicing involves several key steps:

- **Define the user journey:** Understand the path your user takes when interacting with your product or service. This includes the initial contact, engagement, and long-term interaction. Understanding the user journey helps to identify gaps and opportunities in your product or service.
- **Event storming of the value journey:** This is a collaborative workflow of brainstorming and problem-solving using sticky notes to visualize the sequence of events in a user journey. This method helps to identify actions and interactions the user experiences.
- **Map to existing products:** Align the event storming with your existing products. This can provide insights into how well your products fit into the user journey and where improvements or new products might be needed.
- **Reorganize ownerships:** This involves adjusting team responsibilities to align with the user journey and product mapping. Teams should own certain steps of the user journey to ensure they are focused on delivering value at each stage.
- **Re-architecture if necessary:** If your current system architecture does not support the user journey and product mapping, consider a redesign. This could involve breaking down a monolithic system into microservices or adjusting your tech stack to better serve user needs.
- **Support teams on mentality change:** Transitioning to a user journey-focused approach with vertical slicing and product teams requires a shift in mindset. Support your teams through this change by providing training, fostering open communication, and promoting a culture of collaboration.

### **Conclusion**


By embracing the concept of product teams and implementing vertical slicing within software departments, leaders can create environments that are more agile, innovative, and aligned with customer needs. This approach not only enhances the efficiency and quality of product development but also fosters a culture of collaboration and continuous improvement. As an engineering leader, steering your organization towards this paradigm will necessitate thoughtful planning, commitment, and adaptability, but the resulting advantages can profoundly transform your product development lifecycle.

