---
published: '2024-06-12T22:00:00.000Z'
canonical_url: https://leadshorizons.com/p/superstar-vs-rockstar-engineers
series: Engineering Strategy 101
authors:
  - alvarolorentedev
description: >-
  Discover the unique roles and contributions of Superstar and Rockstar
  engineers in tech teams. Learn how to balance innovation and stability for
  optimal productivity and competitiveness
Tags:
  - productivity
  - technology
  - startup
  - development
cover_image: >-
  https://prod-files-secure.s3.us-west-2.amazonaws.com/df75203e-cd58-41eb-8339-d5bf4288eb0e/6cc9f17b-747a-4a8b-a526-e26d9b4e9486/sr2.jpeg?X-Amz-Algorithm=AWS4-HMAC-SHA256&X-Amz-Content-Sha256=UNSIGNED-PAYLOAD&X-Amz-Credential=ASIAZI2LB4666NQ7HL4E%2F20250731%2Fus-west-2%2Fs3%2Faws4_request&X-Amz-Date=20250731T105714Z&X-Amz-Expires=3600&X-Amz-Security-Token=IQoJb3JpZ2luX2VjEKf%2F%2F%2F%2F%2F%2F%2F%2F%2F%2FwEaCXVzLXdlc3QtMiJHMEUCID2XKpkmUKfGgWWagcTb%2BSKOySx0IobPosOc5CtmsS8aAiEA3xEREImfccbu1R2sgppWTxLraN4xpXLQvJ9l2IVHm6QqiAQI0P%2F%2F%2F%2F%2F%2F%2F%2F%2F%2FARAAGgw2Mzc0MjMxODM4MDUiDPq%2BmCRrv0Oycvb1UCrcA1R2b7aznSDmF0zmTwzKlCrkPqMfl94kBZ3yCfSmU%2FXLQ4xy6TBCSZdYEFVgz%2B9VDJA3EHxavtIye741yF%2BSQ%2BTaL17aK5OqgyjALD6dzgpeeu9aOVkiqDrvl%2B2gb83WI95OBtttRPQJBRqMAtoVKcsAssKWFRJ%2Bjcf7uofdKOxGBSX7xobyOR3M6IyadHLTiplynPFVmNi5%2FjeJda0vyEBV%2F1ZJTr%2B5D73VtarNe81VIAiQFF%2Fp7r8ajT2iv6TN8x%2F9ftjYvnji4Qm%2BT6rYaaQWDYMOa6H1uG5m7zg09DmSSCMWD1otAb17aUuz6wK%2FW6JaYawtqJNWwb9dAvm%2FeblLbuZuXXEs%2F16CqU7mNvAh0ataaD3soSrbXCKUNiyUXRnl%2FG5W%2F%2FCwz4Dk30%2FzUprpfuRcAcGMkmw6ntUCscG26pJcuAsbQi9B8VT%2FnZ5cwFLKmzLmfpivhkoyTse%2BzO61LWAOTpEo9bql3fnnyIDql%2BYe%2FMH1ljy9KKBEniUqNu95E17eRl8mAGdKv%2F%2FJvhLYrV06467Fld8x6HnbaxyNXzTmfR3TA0zUOOkNpB1tXVXGc%2B%2F35nvnBXxMI%2F8x5%2FmadxR7I1QAtB6FX6ZUHg0AMp6ytU%2Bf6A8zvRV8MMaarMQGOqUBua85ef7BZY%2FuoqXuheDMDnmFvX64NWWuJ9jRkpAh8wgsS9Q%2FleBE7ZkBmw6DxlVDd4uVw2n0TSEdpktsAGz5Xq1aDWTg46kbpiXQ9zqRwTTIElBOIiGGSPENdrP%2B40NTrrRUKzOFe0Yx7sOZxLyUJ3%2Ft4cyk32v0ZE6LfeT25vRvXc8SC8V%2FIYy8v%2FcosgdLSnKzw4FbzS%2BA8p%2FFOBjrzU67oPYa&X-Amz-Signature=3b1c9c16f1d688e6207c9a7bf1d917611bb23cfc7e5c9c94eca7611da81d6fa4&X-Amz-SignedHeaders=host&x-amz-checksum-mode=ENABLED&x-id=GetObject
title: >-
  Superstar vs. Rockstar Engineers: Balancing Innovation and Stability in Tech
  Teams
---

Have you noticed a broad spectrum of aspirations among your team members?


Some individuals are eager to tackle new challenges and progress rapidly, while others prefer maintaining the status quo. Do you find one approach more valuable than the other, and if so, why?


Drawing inspiration from the book Radical Candor, this article will discuss the categorization of engineers into Superstars and Rockstars. We'll examine their unique traits, contributions, and roles within the development process.


## Superstar Engineers


Superstar Engineers are those who strive for more than just the ordinary, who are ready to take calculated risks for innovation. Within the technology sector, they act as catalysts for change and disruption.


Some traits you can find in the work of these engineers:

- They continuously pursue growth and development
- They’re not content with the status quo
- They’re willing to take risks to innovate
- They’re frequently the driving force behind breakthroughs  in technologies, processes, practices, or products
- They’re motivated by a passion for innovation and growth
- They propel the team forward, ensuring it stays relevant and competitive

## Rockstar Engineers


Rockstar Engineers are the backbone of the team, providing the dependability that keeps everything running smoothly. Without their steady influence, the boundary-pushing work of Superstars would be far less effective.


Some traits you can find in the work of these engineers:

- They provide stability and consistency within the team.
- They're domain experts, with a deep understanding of particular systems or processes
- They ensure the smooth running of systems and processes
- They manage and enhance existing systems
- They're highly reliable, often serving as the go-to person for issues within their domain
- They're incredibly dependable, often the first person you'd call for problems in their area
- They value quality and take genuine pride in their work
- While they may not be the most visible, their contribution to the team and the business is absolutely critical

## Types of Engineers and engineering strategy


Having discussed different types of engineers, let's now explore how this impacts various aspects of our company or team.


### Team & Company Composition


It's crucial to strike a balance between these two types of engineers inside a team or company. The optimal engineering strategy blends Superstars and Rockstars, ensuring the team has both the stability to manage current tasks and the innovative spirit required to stay competitive.


An overabundance of Superstars may lead to instability due to frequent changes, causing the team to remain in a perpetual state of upheaval.


On the other hand, an excess of Rockstars might lead to stagnation, preventing the team from adapting to necessary changes and reducing productivity.


### Remuneration & Growth


Equally important than having the correct profiles is ensuring that both are valued equally. 


This is often a challenge as engineering ladders tend to favor Superstars, who are generally more motivated to climb the ladder. 
These ladders often dictate an employee's financial compensation. Leading to Superstars accelerating their remuneration faster than Rockstars, who may hit a pay ceiling. 
For this, it's important to tie compensation not to a specific role, but to the unique value an individual contributes to the company or team.


## Closing thoughts


Recognizing this duality and managing it effectively is one of the key roles of leadership in the tech industry. By acknowledging and valuing the unique contributions of both Superstars and Rockstars, leaders can foster a diverse, balanced, and highly productive team. This duality is not a hindrance, but a strength that can be harnessed to drive a team or company's success.

